URL-interop.md, before:

# URL Interop

(or RFC 3986 vs WHATWG URL Specification vs the real world)

This document is an attempt to describe where and how [RFC
3986](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986) (86), [RFC
3987](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987) (87) and [the WHATWG URL
Specification](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/) (TWUS) differ. This might be
useful input when trying to interop with URLs on the modern Internet.

"URL" (in the scope of this document) refers to the sequence of characters
passed into APIs, sent over the network and passed from machine to machine. It
does not necessarily match what typical browsers accept or support in their
GUI address bars.

This document focuses on network-using URL schemes (http, https, ftp, etc) as
well as 'file'.

This is a best-effort and describes the situation as we understand it at the
time of writing. Since the TWUS document is "living" and software keep getting
updated, chances are conditions have changed since we last updated this
document!

If you find mistakes or have additional interop issues to suggest, please file
[an issue](https://github.com/bagder/docs/issues) or [a pull
request](https://github.com/bagder/docs/pulls)!

## URL components

Put simply, a URL may consist of the following components - many of them are
optional:

    [scheme][divider][userinfo][hostname][port number][path][query][fragment]

Each component is separated from the following component with a divider
character.

Which in an example could look like

    http://user:password@www.example.com:80/index.hmtl?foo=bar#top

| Component  | Value           | Known interop issues exist |
|------------|-----------------|----------------------------|
| scheme     | http            | no                         |
| divider    | ://             | YES                        |
| userinfo   | user:password   | YES                        |
| hostname   | www.example.com | YES                        |
| port number| 80              | YES                        |
| path       | index.html      | YES                        |
| query      | foo=bar         | (waiting to get written)   |
| fragment   | top             | YES                        |

## Scheme

There are no known interop issues.

## Divider

86: specifies this to be [exactly
"://"](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3) for all network-using
(hierarchical) schemes.

TWUS: says a parser must accept zero to an infinite amount of slashes but a
producer should use two.

Real world: one and three slash URLs occur, possibly a few using even
more. 'file' URLs are notoriously often malformed.

Additionally, browsers also happily accept *backslashes* instead of slashes,
thus redirects to `http:\\\\\example.com` work.

## Userinfo

The userinfo field can be used to set user name and password to pass on to the
server. The use of this field is discouraged since it often means passing
around the password in plain text and is thus a security risk.

86: specifies that ['@' is the
separator](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3.2) between the
userinfo field and the host name. The first '@' character really.

TWUS: instead takes the last '@' before the host name to be the separator

**This is an interop collision**

## Hostname

### Numerical IP addresses

86: mentions how [IPv4 addresses with a
dot-notation](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3.2.2) are valid

TWUS: specifies that both 32bit numbers ("12345677") as well as partial
dot-addresses ("127.0") are valid.

Real world: 32 bit numbers occur, and are automatically supported if typical
OS level name resolver functions are used since they often support this out of
the box.

### Different base numericals

86: mentions how each number in a IPv4 dotted address is a *decimal* number
between 0 and 255.

TWUS: doesn't specify which base the numbers should be specified as, which I
presume is makes "http://0177.0.0.1" etc valid with an octal number as the
first 8 bit value.

Real world: getaddrinfo() handles octals and hex in IPv4 addresses.

### IDNA

Hostnames were traditionally ASCII based. When introducing IDN hostnames, it
has caused problems to the specifications and they are lacking.

86: Is written to work without IDN (ASCII characters), so basically it works
with already punycoded domain names.

87: Specifies [IDNA 2003 to be used](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987#section-3.1)

TWUS: Doesn't specify IDNA 2003 nor 2008, but [somehow that's still
clear](https://github.com/whatwg/url/issues/223)

Real world: A total mess. Some national registries (the German DENIC for example)
require [IDNA 2008](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5890), which makes user-agents
treating the host name according to [IDNA 2003](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3490)
and IDNA 2008 TR46/transitional to fail or even to resolve the wrong IP address.
Some user-agents use IDNA 2003, some do IDNA 2008 TR46/transitional and some do
IDNA 2008 TR46/non-transitional.

[EURid using IDNA 2008 with Homoglyph Bundling rules](https://eurid.eu/en/register-a-eu-domain/domain-names-with-special-characters-idns/)

[DENIC describing IDNA 2003/2008 collisions](https://www.denic.de/en/know-how/idn-domains/)

**This is an interop collision**

**This is a security issue**

## Port number

The port number is a TCP port number between 0 and 65535.

[86](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3.2.3) and TWUS agree that
this is a base-10 number that is virtually unbounded in
length. 00000000000000000000000000000000000080 means 80 in both specs.

TWUS: limits the number to a 16bit unsigned value (0-65535) while 86 has no such language.

Real world: some parsers ignore "rubbish" entered after the number all the way
to the next component divider (a slash, a pound sign, or a question
mark). That seems to be a bug according to both 86 and TWUS.

Also, when using URLs containing multiple port numbers like "http://[127.0.0.1]:11211:80", many URL parsers (Ruby, JavaScript, PHP, perl) will extract and use the latter port number (80) and ignore the first one, some other parsers will extract and use the first one and some will report errors...

## Path

### 8bit

86: says that a URL path is specified as ASCII characters or need to be URL
encoded. That makes 8-bit characters illegal.

TWUS:

Real world: 8bit characters are occasionally seen in URLs in the wild, and
when used in redirects, browsers are known to URL-encode them in the next
outgoing request.

### U+0020, space

86: does not allow spaces (U+0020) to be part of the path. A space instead
ends the URL.

TWUS: allows spaces in URLs and will instead URL-encode it to %20 when sent in
a request. A TWUS URL thus needs to end on another character or have another
method to know the end.

Real world: Spaces are occasionally seen in URLs in the wild, and when used in
redirects, browsers are known to URL-encode them in the next outgoing request.

### Leading slashes in file: URLS

86: Since unix file systems can handle any number of leading slashes, they have been fine.

TWUS: [No leading slashes](https://github.com/whatwg/url/issues/232) on file: URLs

### Pretending backslashes are slashes

86: Backslashes are not slashes

TWUS: Backslashes should be converted to slashes and then treated as such!

## Query

(I've heard there are problems here.)

## Fragment

Web browsers have not decided entirely on how fragments work, at least not for
`data:` URLs. Should they support framgments or not?
[Webkit](https://bugs.webkit.org/show_bug.cgi?id=68089) differs from the
others.

# Test suite

TWUS has a test suite:

https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/blob/master/url/resources/urltestdata.json

Commit message:

URL-interop.md: mention zone ids

URL-interop.md, after:

# URL Interop

(or RFC 3986 vs WHATWG URL Specification vs the real world)

This document is an attempt to describe where and how [RFC
3986](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986) (86), [RFC
3987](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987) (87) and [the WHATWG URL
Specification](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/) (TWUS) differ. This might be
useful input when trying to interop with URLs on the modern Internet.

"URL" (in the scope of this document) refers to the sequence of characters
passed into APIs, sent over the network and passed from machine to machine. It
does not necessarily match what typical browsers accept or support in their
GUI address bars.

This document focuses on network-using URL schemes (http, https, ftp, etc) as
well as 'file'.

This is a best-effort and describes the situation as we understand it at the
time of writing. Since the TWUS document is "living" and software keep getting
updated, chances are conditions have changed since we last updated this
document!

If you find mistakes or have additional interop issues to suggest, please file
[an issue](https://github.com/bagder/docs/issues) or [a pull
request](https://github.com/bagder/docs/pulls)!

## URL components

Put simply, a URL may consist of the following components - many of them are
optional:

    [scheme][divider][userinfo][hostname][port number][path][query][fragment]

Each component is separated from the following component with a divider
character.

Which in an example could look like

    http://user:password@www.example.com:80/index.hmtl?foo=bar#top

| Component  | Value           | Known interop issues exist |
|------------|-----------------|----------------------------|
| scheme     | http            | no                         |
| divider    | ://             | YES                        |
| userinfo   | user:password   | YES                        |
| hostname   | www.example.com | YES                        |
| port number| 80              | YES                        |
| path       | index.html      | YES                        |
| query      | foo=bar         | (waiting to get written)   |
| fragment   | top             | YES                        |

## Scheme

There are no known interop issues.

## Divider

86: specifies this to be [exactly
"://"](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3) for all network-using
(hierarchical) schemes.

TWUS: says a parser must accept zero to an infinite amount of slashes but a
producer should use two.

Real world: one and three slash URLs occur, possibly a few using even
more. 'file' URLs are notoriously often malformed.

Additionally, browsers also happily accept *backslashes* instead of slashes,
thus redirects to `http:\\\\\example.com` work.

## Userinfo

The userinfo field can be used to set user name and password to pass on to the
server. The use of this field is discouraged since it often means passing
around the password in plain text and is thus a security risk.

86: specifies that ['@' is the
separator](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3.2) between the
userinfo field and the host name. The first '@' character really.

TWUS: instead takes the last '@' before the host name to be the separator

**This is an interop collision**

## Hostname

### Numerical IPv4 addresses

86: mentions how [IPv4 addresses with a
dot-notation](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3.2.2) are valid

TWUS: specifies that both 32bit numbers ("12345677") as well as partial
dot-addresses ("127.0") are valid.

Real world: 32 bit numbers occur, and are automatically supported if typical
OS level name resolver functions are used since they often support this out of
the box.

### Numerical IPv6 addresses

[RFC 6874](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6874) documents how to provide
the "zone id" with the IPv6 address. curl's URL parser (for example) detects
and recognizes this.

TWUS: does not allow zone id for IPv6 addresses.

### Different base numericals

86: mentions how each number in a IPv4 dotted address is a *decimal* number
between 0 and 255.

TWUS: doesn't specify which base the numbers should be specified as, which I
presume is makes "http://0177.0.0.1" etc valid with an octal number as the
first 8 bit value.

Real world: getaddrinfo() handles octals and hex in IPv4 addresses.

### IDNA

Hostnames were traditionally ASCII based. When introducing IDN hostnames, it
has caused problems to the specifications and they are lacking.

86: Is written to work without IDN (ASCII characters), so basically it works
with already punycoded domain names.

87: Specifies [IDNA 2003 to be used](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987#section-3.1)

TWUS: Doesn't specify IDNA 2003 nor 2008, but [somehow that's still
clear](https://github.com/whatwg/url/issues/223)

Real world: A total mess. Some national registries (the German DENIC for example)
require [IDNA 2008](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5890), which makes user-agents
treating the host name according to [IDNA 2003](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3490)
and IDNA 2008 TR46/transitional to fail or even to resolve the wrong IP address.
Some user-agents use IDNA 2003, some do IDNA 2008 TR46/transitional and some do
IDNA 2008 TR46/non-transitional.

[EURid using IDNA 2008 with Homoglyph Bundling rules](https://eurid.eu/en/register-a-eu-domain/domain-names-with-special-characters-idns/)

[DENIC describing IDNA 2003/2008 collisions](https://www.denic.de/en/know-how/idn-domains/)

**This is an interop collision**

**This is a security issue**

## Port number

The port number is a TCP port number between 0 and 65535.

[86](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-3.2.3) and TWUS agree that
this is a base-10 number that is virtually unbounded in
length. 00000000000000000000000000000000000080 means 80 in both specs.

TWUS: limits the number to a 16bit unsigned value (0-65535) while 86 has no such language.

Real world: some parsers ignore "rubbish" entered after the number all the way
to the next component divider (a slash, a pound sign, or a question
mark). That seems to be a bug according to both 86 and TWUS.

Also, when using URLs containing multiple port numbers like "http://[127.0.0.1]:11211:80", many URL parsers (Ruby, JavaScript, PHP, perl) will extract and use the latter port number (80) and ignore the first one, some other parsers will extract and use the first one and some will report errors...

## Path

### 8bit

86: says that a URL path is specified as ASCII characters or need to be URL
encoded. That makes 8-bit characters illegal.

TWUS:

Real world: 8bit characters are occasionally seen in URLs in the wild, and
when used in redirects, browsers are known to URL-encode them in the next
outgoing request.

### U+0020, space

86: does not allow spaces (U+0020) to be part of the path. A space instead
ends the URL.

TWUS: allows spaces in URLs and will instead URL-encode it to %20 when sent in
a request. A TWUS URL thus needs to end on another character or have another
method to know the end.

Real world: Spaces are occasionally seen in URLs in the wild, and when used in
redirects, browsers are known to URL-encode them in the next outgoing request.

### Leading slashes in file: URLS

86: Since unix file systems can handle any number of leading slashes, they have been fine.

TWUS: [No leading slashes](https://github.com/whatwg/url/issues/232) on file: URLs

### Pretending backslashes are slashes

86: Backslashes are not slashes

TWUS: Backslashes should be converted to slashes and then treated as such!

## Query

(I've heard there are problems here.)

## Fragment

Web browsers have not decided entirely on how fragments work, at least not for
`data:` URLs. Should they support framgments or not?
[Webkit](https://bugs.webkit.org/show_bug.cgi?id=68089) differs from the
others.

# Test suite

TWUS has a test suite:

https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/blob/master/url/resources/urltestdata.json
